the best way to understand yourself is
having someone in your corner
coaches can help you understand yourself
by providing an angle on your issues
for more information on coaching and a
way to sign up for our wait list
click the first link in the description
hey guys dr k here
so today i'd like to talk to you guys a
little bit about
non-clinical depression or what i call
congruent depression
now this is kind of a weird video
because in this series on depression
so far we may have focused a lot on like
clinical depression
or what we think of is an illness right
so let's just stop for a second
and kind of think through this so
depression right now like
in the world and certainly in developed
countries seems to be getting worse
and why is that so it's my belief that a
lot of people are depressed
certainly people are getting depressed
and then they go to see a psychiatrist
and then a psychiatrist may diagnose
them with an illness
right they say that your something about
you is broken or ill
and then they'll provide for them
treatment like medication
and part of the reason that i think
depression is getting worse is that even
though people are seeing more
psychiatrists
not all of the depression that people
experience
is an illness and somewhere along the
way as
a society we started assuming that if
you're depressed
that also means you're ill so let's
think about that
and kind of take a step back and try to
understand what is
illness and is it possible for a
depression
to for you to be depressed but it not be
some kind of malfunction
and i think once we think through that
we'll start to see like
how to move forward if we're not
actually ill or malfunctioning
so the first thing to think about is
that an illness is like a malfunction
it's something in your body that isn't
doing what it's supposed to be doing so
if we think about let's say like getting
the common cold
our nose is sometimes supposed to
produce mucus and sometimes we're
supposed to cough if maybe we get
something stuck in our throat
but when we get ill with a cold our body
starts to produce way more mucus than
normal and it
starts to cough when maybe it's not
supposed to
and so we can kind of think about that
as an illness it's the body not working
the way it's supposed to
if we think about blood pressure so our
blood pressure
is supposed to stay within a particular
range and then when we get something
like hypertension
our blood pressure rises above what it's
supposed to do
so that too is a malfunction and
sometimes
our brain malfunctions and we end up
with clinical depression
and so what that means is that like what
that really means is that your
brain is malfunctioning compared to what
you are supposed to be doing
so if your life is going really well and
like you have a good job and maybe
you're in a relationship and you know
there are people in your life who care
about you
and at the same time you wake up every
day and you feel sort of sad and empty
that's more consistent with a clinical
depression because we look at this
person's life and we say this person
should be happy
and if they should be happy and they're
waking up every day and they're sad that
implies to me that there's a malfunction
and if something is broken that also
implies a particular way that we're
supposed to fix it
so in this person maybe their serotonin
system is malfunctioning or their
serotonin is low
which is why we can consider doing
something like giving them medication
and then if we correct that sort of
serotonin imbalance they start to live
the normal life that they're supposed to
but the tricky thing is that not
everyone who's depressed
should be happy right and in fact if we
really stop and think about it
a lot of people who are depressed maybe
should be depressed
and what i mean by that is that it's
actually normal or i like to use the
word congruent
with your situation if you're stuck in
life if you don't have a job you don't
have a fulfilling
romantic relationship you're kind of
socially isolated
it's almost like you're supposed to feel
depressed in that kind of situation
so unlike clinical depression congruent
depression
is kind of like appropriate to your
situation
now this gets tricky because clinical
depression can
come out of something that is is
like you know not good in your life like
if you lose your job you can sort of get
a clinical depression that's
triggered by a bad circumstance but the
key factor there is that if the bad
circumstance
is fixed someone with congruent
depression will start to feel better
in someone with clinical depression now
that the clinical episode has been
triggered
it has a lifespan of its own that's
independent of its circumstances
so if we think about clinical depression
once again it's
episodic so it has it has a start and it
has a finish
congruent depression can be more
long-lasting can last for years or even
your entire life
and is sort of related to like major
shortcomings in your life
so sometimes people will come into my
office and they'll say i've been
depressed
ever since i was 15 and they're like 30
years old so they've been depressed
every day since they were 15.
when i think about that person and i
talked to that person i don't think
about a neurochemical imbalance which
has been
sort of off for 15 years i think that
this person
is depressed because there's something
in their life that's fundamentally
lacking
there so people who have congruent
depression
oftentimes have a life that lacks
purpose
they lack motivation because there's
like no end goal that they're moving
towards
they sort of feel loneliness and
sometimes they feel paralyzed by their
loneliness
they feel stuck they feel like they're
living their life on autopilot
their life can feel like a blur like
you're fast forwarding through your life
with video games
substances binge watching shows social
media
like you wake up every day and you just
engage with devices or things that
affect your dopamine system without
actually like living life it's just like
a blur
one day becomes the next one day becomes
a week one week becomes a month
one month becomes a year one one year
becomes three years
you don't know what you're doing it's
almost like you kind of become the
zombie
people who feel like they're behind when
they're comparing themselves to other
people like
you know they look at all these other
people who are way more successful than
them
and for years and years and years they
feel more behind more behind more behind
now is that a problem absolutely is it
depression
absolutely but is it a brain malfunction
i'm not so sure and that's the idea
behind a congruent depression
i think some of the depression we
experience in life isn't
actually our brain malfunctioning it's
our brain functioning the way that it's
sort of supposed to
or it's our brain doing the best to be
adaptive which can sometimes cause us
problems
but it's almost like an appropriate
depression or as if it's
congruent to our circumstances
and so like if we think about that we
kind of have to take a step back and we
have to ask ourselves like why you know
if
sadness and depression aren't a
malfunction
then what is their function and that
begs the question
why have our brains evolved to
experience sadness or depression in the
first place
why do we even have negative emotions
and it turns out that sadness and
depression are
our brains way of signaling to us that
we need to
fix something in our life right like if
we feel lonely
that sort of if we think if you take it
the average person let's not talk about
someone who really has congruent
depression but if we think about just in
general
the feeling of loneliness why does our
brain have the feeling of loneliness
and that's because it's our brain's way
of telling us like hey we need to
connect with other human beings and then
usually
people who feel lonely will reach out to
someone or they'll you know call their
friends or they'll reach out to their
parents or they'll
message their their gaming buddies and
then you'll get together
and then that loneliness kind of goes
away a lot of negative
feelings that we have negative emotions
or feelings of depression
are actually our brain or our being
our self way of like giving us a compass
to move forward and make a positive
change
in life dissatisfaction with ourselves
helps us learn what our compass is and
helps us actually move
forward loneliness actually pulls us
towards other people
feeling like you're lacking purpose is
your brain's way of telling you to like
hey like
let's go do something because this life
is not cutting it for us right now
so like if these things are sort of good
for us then like what's the problem
right why don't we just
just feel i mean it's kind of weird but
like what's the problem with this if
this is our compass like isn't that a
good thing
and this is where i think we get into
some really tricky stuff which is that
these signals from our brain used to
have easy solutions
and i think the reason that we suffer
now is because they don't really have
solutions that used to be simple like
they were
remember that our brains and our you
know emotions and things like that
evolved millions of years ago and were
sort of like designed for a more simple
lifestyle
like if you think about you know
loneliness and connection like i'm
indian and like a thousand even 50 years
ago
in india there used to be arranged
marriages so romantic loneliness was
like in a sense less of an
issue kind of or i'm sort of making that
claim
because like you know your your partner
or your spouse was kind of chosen for
you by your family anyway and like 50
years ago 100 years ago
1000 years ago it's not like things are
today with tinder where like you know
you have to meet a thousand people and
like 999 of them reject you there isn't
that same sense of rejection because our
society
has started to evolve in a particular
way that is leaving our brains
and our evolutionary like emotional
circuitry kind of behind
our brain and evolution just can't keep
pace with the rapid change of society
so these these compasses these feelings
that we used to have
used to have generally speaking easier
solutions
but i think the solutions have gotten
more difficult
and it's harder to actually figure out
how to move forward
another good example of this is like you
know if you think about
let's say once again in india if you go
back 200 years there used to be a caste
system so you were sort of born into a
cast
and your job was kind of determined by
what your family's job is
there wasn't really like much choice
like finding purpose in your life was
like pretty simple because
you know your dad is a farmer his dad
was a farmer your mom is a farmer her
mom was a farmer you all are all farmers
so what are you gonna do you're gonna be
a farmer
and so in a sense things were a little
bit more simple whereas
now if you're lacking purpose like there
isn't a clear answer how you go about
finding it
and what that means is that you wake up
every day and you're kind of feeling
depressed
and and it's almost like congruent with
your life because your life actually
doesn't have a whole lot
of purpose you're not really doing
anything that benefits the world in a
profound way so like
that's how you should feel in a bizarre
way
and so i'm not saying that you know it
sort of makes sense to me
why congruent depression happens that
doesn't mean that we need to accept it
or that we shouldn't fix it in fact
quite the opposite
i think actually a big part of why we're
even making these videos is to help
people understand that
if you wake up and you feel depressed
because you have not no reason to get
out of bed in the morning
the solution to that may not be to go
see a psychiatrist and get started on a
medication
the solution is to learn in our current
world
how you go about finding purpose how you
go about
finding meaning how you go about
discovering the nature of motivation and
where it comes from
and so in order to do that we have to
dig into a lot of really important
questions
like where purpose comes from how to
start comparing to others
or sorry how to stop comparing to others
and start living your own life
how fantasies keep us stuck where hope
comes from how to overcome hopelessness
how to develop confidence and what the
the challenge here is that like
what's happened is as we sort of
medicalized depression
we stopped looking for answers to all of
those questions and we started saying oh
your problem is that you have a
neurochemical imbalance
so here's a pill to fix that and so our
society has been sort of
focusing on the medical definition of
depression
as we sort of study neurochemistry and
we have
pharma pharmacology companies that are
coming out with new drugs
we put so much emphasis in that
direction that we've stopped
asking ourselves these questions and i
think
that if you're depressed there are two
options right one is that you actually
your brain is malfunctioning
and the other is that it's functioning
perfectly fine
and in either case there's certainly a
way forward in the case of a malfunction
we want to correct the malfunction
but in case of a congruent depression we
need to start answering some of those
questions right like where does
depression come from what are all of the
things that we're i'm feeling
what are all of the ways in which
depression manifests in my life
there could be a neurochemical imbalance
there could be like a lack of
spirituality or a lack of like you know
purpose in your life
so we have to differentiate these out
because if we use
pills to fix all that it's not going to
work for half of it
and that's the whole reason to think
about a congruent depression
so in your case you know if you've been
feeling depressed for years
and have these like big issues that like
make you
unhappy in life certainly psychotherapy
or seeing like a therapist could help
but chances are your solution is
actually going to be in finding purpose
in finding meaning and
understanding yourself better and sort
of
fixing your loneliness developing
confidence and we're going to dive into
that
as well